The impulse response is the output
of a filter when the input
is the delta function.
A fundamental result states that
the impulse response fully characterizes
the behavior of an LTI system.
Let's see why that is so.
Assume that we have a filter and we can
measure its impulse response by inputting
a delta function, and it turns out that
the impulse response is an exponentially
decaying sequence, h of n equal to alpha
to the power of n, times the unit step.
Now, we want to use the same filter to
filter an arbitrary sequence x of n that,
in this example, is simply a three
point sequence that is equal to 2 for
n=0, is equal to 3 for n=1, and is equal
to 1 for n=2, and is 0 everywhere else.
So, we can always write our
sequence as a linear combination
of delayed delta function.
So, in particular for our example,
x of n is equal to 2 times delta of n +
3 times delta of n-1 plus delta of n-2.
Now, we know the impulse response,
so the response to the delta.
And by exploiting linearity and
time-invariance,
we can compute the response
of the system to the input sequence x[n]
just by knowing the impulse response.
Indeed, we apply the linear filter to
the linear combination of deltas and
by exploiting linearity first,
we can split the operation of the filter
over the three components of the signal.
And by exploiting time and variance,
we just sum together appropriately scaled
version of the impulse response delayed.
We can look at this graphically and
we see that,
when we filter the first component,
2 times delta of n, we get 2 times h of n.
The second component of the signal
is 3 times delta of n minus 1, and
this gives rise to 3h of n minus 1, which
we plot on top of the other response.
And finally, the last component is
simply delta of n minus 2 which filter
gives h of n minus 2.
So, now we have the three components,
we sum them together in linearity, and
we have obtained the response of
the system to our arbitrary input.
In general, remember that we can always
write x of n, a generic discrete time
sequence, as the sum for k that goes
from minus infinity to plus infinity of
a sequence of time delayed deltas scaled
by the values of the sequence itself.
So, this probably seemed like
a futile exercise in module 3.2,
but now we see the usefulness of this
representation because, by linearity and
time invariance, we can express the output
as the sum from k that goes from minus
infinity to plus infinity of
the values of the sequence times
the impulse response,
time reversed and delayed by n.
This sum here is so important in signal
processing that it gets its own name and
it's called the convolution
of sequences x[n] and h[n].
The convolution which represents
the output of a filter given
its impulse response and
an arbitrary input sequence x[n ],
is actually an algorithmic formula
to compute the output of the filter.
The ingredients are a input sequence
x[m] and a second sequence, h[m].
And the recipe involves
the following steps.
First, we time-reverse
the impulse response.
So, we flipped it in time,
if it goes like this.
Then, it will look like this.
And at each step,
from minus infinity to plus infinity,
we center the time-reversed impulse
response in the current sample n,
so we shift the time reversed
equal response by minus n.
And then we compute the inner
product between this shifted replica
of the impulse response and
the input sequence.
Let's look at this graphically using this
the same examples that we used before.
So, we have an impulse response which
is a decay in exponential sequence, and
we have a three point
simple input sequence.
We plot these three actors
on a chart like this.
We have the input sequence on top.
We have the time reversed and the delay
impulse response on the second panel.
And here, we have the inner product
between these two sequences.
So, at each step, as I said, we center
the time-reversed impulse response on
the current sample, so we start as -4 and
we compute the inner product.
Since the impulse signal in our example
is now 0, only between 0 and 2,
up to 0, fundamentally, nothing happens
and the inner product is always 0.
And we can see that it was 0 for
values before -4,
and it will continue to
be 0 until we hit 0.
At which point, we start to have
an overlap between these two sequences,
and the inner product will not be 0, in
particular, on the first step, it will be
equal to this sample which is equal to 1
times this sample which is equal to 2.
So, the sum will be equal to 2.
We advance another step and
then we see that the overlap involves
two points now, here and here.
And we compute their products and
their sum and
we get the second point
in our output sequence.
Third step, we'll finally involve all
three points from the input sequence.
We compute the product with
the impulse response and the sum and
we get our third output sample.
And the process continues like so.
Now, since the impulse response
is an infinite sequence, one side
of the infinite sequence, from now on, the
inner product will always be non-zero and
will have an output that will continue
to be non-zero forever and ever.
Finally, a few words on the convolution.
The convolution is of course linear and
time invariant because it describes
a linear and time invariant operation.
It is also commutative which means that
if you have two filters in cascade,
you can safely invert their sequence and
the result will not change.
For absolutely and
square summable sequences,
the convolution is also associative, which
means that if you have a cascaded system,
you can lump their effect
into a single filter,
whose impulse response is the convolution
of the individual impulse responses.